Janzen-Connell Field Methods Started July 30th 2020. 

We decided to only select forest sites that were dominated by coniferous trees as these sites were similar across a wide range of locations in Smithers. This allowed for easy comparison between and within sites as many sites shared similar species composition. 

To start setting up a plot we would first mark a single tree with flagging tape and note this tree in the field book. Using the first tagged tree as a waypoint, we moved twenty meters in a cardinal direction in the opposite direction of the hiking trail and tagged the nearest tree, note this tree and the cardinal direction to get to the corner should be noted in the field book as well. Since our sites are on well traveled trails, we would use a cardinal direction that led us away from the trail and into the forest. We repeated this until we had a twenty by twenty meter plot with four tagged corners. A one meter long PVC pipe was temporarily put in 10 meters between each corner, this allowed us to ensure trees on the edge were also tagged.

After creating a twenty by twenty meter plot, we tagged and measured the diameter at breast height (1.37 meters) of all adult trees (any woody species with one stem and is larger than 1.37 meters) in the plot. Sometimes adult trees of the same species were grouped together, this occurred if trees were within two meters of each other and trees were numbered in a clock wise direction with a tree tag, put on the first tree that was measured. We set a maximum of no more that 5 trees being grouped together to avoid confusion. To ensure each adult tree was tagged, we started from corner number 4 and moved diagonally to corner number 2 and looking through each tagged tree to ensure everything was tagged. Once all adult trees were confirmed as tagged not which exact tagged trees are the corners in the field note book (unlike what Darwin did most of the time). Take note of the direction of the transect from corner 2 to 4 as this will help will resetting up the transect. Ensure all four corners have been tagged and noted in the field notebook.

To measure germinants and seedlings within our plots, we set up a diagonal transect from one corner of our plot to another using a sixty meter measuring tape. To maintain consistency we ensured our transect went from corner 2 to corner 4 for each plot. Every four meters on this transect, we counted, labelled and measured the height of every seedling within a 0.5 by 0.5 meter subplot. Each Diagonal transect had six germinant/seedling consensus subplots which were labelled A-F. For each subplot, a corner was tagged using a tree tag and a hair pin. To reduce measurement bias, we alternated which sides of the measuring tape the subplot was set up on unless debris or large rocks made it impossible to do so. 

Each plot was at least 50 meters away from each other and we set up all plots using an elevational gradient which was present on Mount Harvey in Smithers, BC. 

Plot information for each plot. Note that the order is weird because JCMH01 and JCMH02 were set up in 2019 while the rest of the plots were set up in 2020.

JCMH01- First corner tagged is a PINCON, second corner is at the north east corner from the first corner, third corner is, fourth corner is southwest. Diagonal transect goes from corner 2 to corner 4 in a southwest direction. All tape is pink in this plot. Subplot A when facing the north east corner (corner 2) is located on the left side of the transect the subplot is tagged on the bottom left. Subplot B when facing the north east corner of the plot is located on the right side of the transect and the top left of the plot is tagged. Subplot C when facing the north east corner is on the left side of the transect and the bottom right of the plot is tagged. Subplot D, when facing the north east corner is on the right of the transect and the right bottom is tagged. Subplot E when facing the north east is on the left side of the transect and the bottom left of the plot is tagged. Subplot F when facing north east corner, the plot is on the right side of the transect and the tag is on the top right. 

JCMH02- First corner is a ABILAS tagged with pink tape, Second corner is north west, third corner is south west and fourth corner is south east. Diagonal transect goes from north west to south east direction. Subplot A when facing the north west corner (Corner 2) is on the left side of the transect and the top right corner is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side of the transect when facing north west and right bottom is tagged. Subplot C is on the left side of the transect when facing the north west corner and the top right corner is tagged. Subplot D is on the right side of the transect when facing the north west corner and the bottom right is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side of the transect when facing the north west corner and the bottom left is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side of the transect when facing the north west corner and the top left is tagged. 

JCMH03- First corner is PINCON1 with blue tape, the second corner is south and is tagged as ALNVIR01, third corner is a subalpine fir and west from the second corner, fourth corner is a dead young subalpine fir is located north from corner three. The diagonal transect went from corner 2 to corner 4 in a north west direction. When facing the second corner subplot A is on the left side with the top left corner tagged. Subplot B is right side of the transect and bottom right is tagged when facing the second corner tree. Subplot C is on the left side of the transect and the bottom left is tagged. Subplot D is the right side of the transect and top right is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side of the transect and the bottom left is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side of the transect and the top right is tagged. 

JCMH04- First corner is pic hub, second corner is south/south east, third corner is east and is a tagged abilas. Final corner is also an ABILAS and is north/north west. All corners are tagged with blue tape. The diagonal is going south. Subplot A when looking at corner two is on the left side of the transect and the top left is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side of the transect and bottom right is tagged. Subplot C is the left side of transect and tagged on the top right. Subplot D is on the right side of the transect and tagged on bottom right. Subplot E is on the left side of the transect and top left is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side of the transect and top right is tagged. 

JCMH05- First corner is a large hemlock tree with blue tape. head south/southwest at 210 to corner number 2 which is a alnvir. Head west/northwest at 300 for corner three which is a bails. head north/north east at 30 for corner 4 which is a pichyb. Transect is going north from corner 2 to corner 4. When facing corner 2, subplot A is on the left side of the transect and the top left is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side of the transect and bottom right is tagged. Subplot C is on the left side of the transect and top right is tagged. Subplot D is on the right side of the transect and bottom left is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side of the transect and bottom left is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side of the transect and top left is tagged. 

JCMH06- First corner is bails which can be seen from the trail and is tagged with blue tape. Second corner is 80 degrees east/north east and is another abilas. third corner is 350 and north/north west with another abilas tagged. fourth corner is 260 and west/north west. transect is 290 going west/northwest from corner 2-4. when looking at corner 2, subplot A is on the left side of the transect and top right is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side and top left is tagged. Subplot C is on the left side of the transect and bottom right is tagged. Subplot D is right side of the transect and top right is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side of the transect and bottom right is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side of the transect and tagged top left. 

JCMH07- First corner is abilas visible from trail, second corner is east 90 and is a tagged ALNINC, next corner is north 0 and is tagged manfer, fourth corner is west 270 and is a tagged abilas. Transect is going south 180. Subplot when facing corner 2, Subplot A is on the right side and bottom left corner is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot C is on the left side and top left is tagged. Subplot D is on the right side and top right is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side and bottom left is tagged. 

JCMH08- First corner is abilas, next corner is 110 south east and is a pichyb. third corner is 20/north north east and is a small pichyb, final corner is 290 west/north west abilas. Subplots are determined by facing the second corner. Subplot A is on the left side of the transect and is tagged bottom right. Subplot B is right side of transect and top left is tagged. Subplot C is left side of transect tagged bottom right. Subplot D is on the right side of transect and top left is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side and top right is tagged.

JCMH09- First corner is abilas, second corner is east/north east 60 and is a abilas seedling, third corner is 330 north/north west and is abilas tagged, fourth corner is west/ south west 240 and is a abilas again. Subplot when facing the second corner, Subplot A is on the left side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side and top left is tagged. Subplot C is on the right side and top left is tagged. Subplot D is on the left side and top right is tagged. Subplot E is on the right side and bottom left is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side and top right is tagged. 

JCMH10- First corner is abilas, second corner is 50 north east and is a dead abilas, third corner is 320 north west and is a very small abilas, fourth corner is 230 south west and is a abilas. when facing the second corner and on the transect, subplot A is on the left side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot B right side of transect with top right tagged. Subplot C left side of transect and bottom left tagged. Subplot D is on the right side and top left is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side and bottom left is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side and top left is tagged.

JCMH11- Abilas is the first corner. second corner is 70/ east- north east and is a abilas, third corner is 340 north north west and is tsuhet, fourth corner is 240 west south west and is a abilas. When facing the second corner tree (abilas), Subplot A is on the left side of the transect and bottom left is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side and top right is tagged. Subplot C is on the left side and top right is tagged. Subplot D is on the right side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot E left side and left bottom is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side and top left is tagged. 

JCMH12- First corner is PICHYB, second corner is north north east 50 and a dead abilas, corner three is 320 north west and is a menfer, corner four south west 230 and is a abilas. When looking at corner 2 which is the dead bailed, Subplot A is on the left side and the left bottom is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side and left bottom is tagged. Subplot C is on the left side and bottom left is tagged. Subplot D is on the right side and top left is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side and bottom left is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side and bottom right is tagged. 

JCMH13- First corner is abilas, second corner is north east 50 and is also an abilas, third corner is 320 north west and is a abilas, is south and is a pine tree. when facing the second corner, Subplot A is on the left side and top right is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side and top right is tagged. Subplot C right side and top right is tagged. Subplot D is on the right side and bottom left is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot F is on the right side and bottom left is tagged. 

JCMH14- first corner is abilas, second corner is east 90 and is a abilas, third corner is north 0 and is a abilas, fourth corner is west 270 is a abilas. When looking at the second corner, Subplot A is on the left side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot B is on the right side and top right is tagged. Subplot C is on the left side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot D is on the right side and bottom right is tagged. Subplot E is on the left side and tagged top left. Subplot F is on the right side and tagged bottom left. 

MISC- When remeasuring the plot first use the instructions above to find the corners, relay the diagonal transect using the same instructions. You can test to see if the transect is played properly by following how each subplot should be laid out based on the notes above. For the subplots they were 4 meters apart therefore subplot A would be four meters on the tape measure and so on. Relay the seedling germinate plot by using where the tag is and the diagonal transect, if you are super lost and notice toothpicks please refer to SEEDLINGDATA.XLXS for which species refer to which toothpicks. In cases were tags have been removed please retag. For each transect please note the cardinal direction that the transect goes in as this was information Darwin forgot to take. Finally if you could also note which east tags correspond to which corners this will also help for future studies. Putting the 1 meter PVC pipe isn't important now that the plot is set up. All of the notes on Darwin's fieldwork notebook have been transcribed here. 

